# Package contents

## Binaries and libraries

```
/usr/
├── bin/
│   └── aziotctl
├── lib/
│   ├── libaziot_keys.so
│   └── engines-1.1/
│   │   └── aziot_keys.so
└── libexec/
    └── aziot/
        ├── aziotd
        ├── aziot-certd -> aziotd
        ├── aziot-identityd -> aziotd
        ├── aziot-keyd -> aziotd
        └── aziot-tpmd -> aziotd
```

The `aziotctl` CLI tool is used to manage and interact with the services.

The service binaries are installed under the distribution's "libexec" directory, since they're executables that are not intended to be directly invoked by a user and thus do not to be in `PATH`. Furthermore, all the services are compiled into a single binary `/usr/libexec/aziot/aziotd`, and the individual service binaries are just
differently-named symlinks to this `aziotd` binary. This saves space since a lot of code in the services is statically linked and can be shared. The `aziotd` binary looks at its `argv[0]` to determine which service it's being asked to run as.

`/usr/lib/libaziot_keys.so` is a library used by the KS for pluggable cryptographic key storage. It exposes a simple C API and is designed to be replaceable by the user if they need to. However the implementation shipped by default is already quite versatile, since it supports both filesystem keys as well as all HSMs with PKCS#11 libraries, so we don't expect users to need to replace it.

`/usr/lib/engines-1.1/aziot_keys.so` is an OpenSSL engine that can be used for mTLS when the client certificate's private key is backed by the KS. See ["OpenSSL engine internals"](openssl-engine-internals.md) for details.


## Config files


```
/etc/aziot/
├── config.toml.template
├── certd/
│   ├── config.d/
│   └── config.toml.default
├── identityd/
│   ├── config.d/
│   └── config.toml.default
├── keyd/
│   ├── config.d/
│   └── config.toml.default
└── tpmd/
    ├── config.d/
    └── config.toml.default
```

The services read the following files for their configuration:
- `config.toml` in the service directory. Eg `/etc/aziot/certd/config.toml`
- Any `*.toml` files in the service's `config.d` directory. Eg `/etc/aziot/certd/config.d/50-overrides.toml`

All files found in this way are unioned. The `config.toml` is considered first, then the files in `config.d` in alphabetical order. If the same setting is specified in two config files, the setting in the file considered second overrides the setting in the file considered first.

Every service has a corresponding `config.toml.default` file that indicates the default settings for that service if no config file is provided.

However, we expect the user to primarily configure the services via the "super-config" file.


## Service endpoint socket files

```
/run/aziot/
├── certd.sock
├── identityd.sock
├── keyd.sock
└── tpmd.sock
```


## Systemd service and socket units

```
/usr/lib/systemd/system/
├── aziot-certd.service
├── aziot-certd.socket
├── aziot-identityd.service
├── aziot-identityd.socket
├── aziot-keyd.service
├── aziot-keyd.socket
├── aziot-tpmd.service
└── aziot-tpmd.socket
```

Note that the `.socket` units will start up the corresponding `.service` units automatically if something attempts to connect to the corresponding socket file. For this reason, the default state is to `aziot-certd.service`, `aziot-keyd.service` and `aziot-tpmd.service` stopped, and only enable their `.socket`s to start up automatically on boot. Both `aziot-identityd.service` and `aziot-identityd.socket` should be enabled to start up on boot, however, so that the device always provisions itself.


## Unix users and groups

CS: `aziotcs`

IS: `aziotid`

KS: `aziotks`

TPMS: `aziottpm`

Each service runs as the corresponding user. Each user belongs to a group of the same name, and the service's endpoint socket file is owned by its user and group. Therefore, in order for a process to communicate with a service, the process's user must be added to the service's group to be able to connect to the endpoint socket file.

For example, if you have a module process, the process needs to interact with the IS to get its module identity, with the KS to be able to use its module identity key to create a SAS token or for mTLS, and with the CS in order to use its module identity certificate for mTLS. So you should add the user that your module runs as to the `aziotid`, `aziotks` and `aziotcs` groups.


## Home directories

```
/var/lib/aziot/
├── certd/
│   └── certs/
├── identityd/
├── keyd/
│   └── keys/
└── tpmd/
```

`/var/lib/aziot/certd/certs` stores any certificates imported or generated by CS.

`/var/lib/aziot/keyd/keys` stores any keys imported or generated by KS that could not be stored in an HSM via PKCS#11. (This is the case if the HSM doesn't support that particular kind of key, or if KS was not configured to use PKCS#11 at all.)


## Package dependencies

The binaries and libraries shipped in this package only depend on OpenSSL (v3.0 on Ubuntu 22.04 and RHEL 9, v1.1 on other supported distributions).
